# Let's explain how is permission granted to delete a file?
In Linux, permission to delete a file is granted by the permission on the directory containing the file, not the permissions on the file itself. If you have the permission to modify a directory, you can delete files within it. However, there's a special rule called the `sticky bit` for shared folders, like the "Temp" folder, where many people can add files. This rule says that even if you can add files to "Temp," you can only delete the files you own, not those added by others. This keeps your files safe from being deleted by someone else.

# Create a file that my colleague can edit but not delete and another he can delete but not edit.
While the right to delete is bound to the containing file, I'll need:
- A directory **d1** where my colleague does not have write permission (so he can not delete it)
- file **d1/file1** that should have write permission so he can edit it
```bash 
mkdir -m u=rwx,g=rx,o=rx d1 
```
```bash
touch d1/file1 
chmod u=rwx,g=rw,o=rw d1/f1
```
For the seconde case (deleting but not editing:
- A directory **d2** where my colleague have write permission
- file **d2/file2** that should not have write permission to preventing hom from editing it
```bash
mkdir -m  u=rwx,g=rwx,o=rwx d2
```

```bash
touch d2/file2
chmod u=rwx,g=r,o=r d2/file2
```
# Does it make sense to be able to assign such rights?
**It might seem illogical at first glance** that a user could have the permission to delete a file but not edit it, given that both actions imply a form of modification. However, it's not the same think beacause Editing a file's content requires write permission on the file itself but deleting a file doesn't involve modifying the file's content but rather involves altering the directory's contents where the file is listed. Therefore, deleting a file requires write permission on the directory containing the file, not on the file itself.

For example, in a software developement project, a team is working on a shared configuration file that contains critical settings for the application's environment. This file is frequently updated with new parameters or values as the project evolves, so as a team member I wanna have permission to edit it but not delete it cause it's a sensitive file.

In other context, we can find a team using a shared directory to store some temporary files that are automatically generated by an application. As these files can quickly consume significant disk space or become outdated, team members need the ability to delete them to manage storage efficiently and keep the working environment clean. However, editing these files might introduce inconsistencies or errors that are hard to trace.
# What are the practical consequences of this experience?
If not properly managed, such confusing permissions could lead to accidental data loss (if users have delete permissions but not edit permissions) or data inconsistency in the other case, but as explained above, it gives some kind of clear responsibility within users.